Merge MapLibre Whitepaper into docs (#558)
maplibre/maplibre-gl-native: docs/src/design/expressions.md

# Expressions

Expressions are *domain specific language (DSL)* built by Mapbox for

> vector styles. Mapbox Vector Style is used in Mapbox Vector Tiles.

Reviewer: I'm confused what Mapbox Vector Style has to do with Mapbox Vector Tiles? Styles describe how to render any data (including, but not limited to MVTs). Additionally, there are no styles **in** MVTs.

Perhaps you mean something like the following?

```suggestion
vector styles. Mapbox GL Style is used in MapLibre GL renderers.
```

Author: Ah good point. The thing wanted to be explicit about is right now the renderer's definition of Map Style schema is limited to Mapbox Vector Style. There are other style schemas too such as Mapzen.

https://stevebennett.me/2017/08/23/openstreetmap-vector-tiles-mixing-and-matching-engines-schemas-and-styles/

Author: And on the the topic of *understanding of reality*, I whole heartedly agree. I wanted to start somewhere. I would rather be wrong than looking at a vast empty. :D

Mapbox Vector Tiles is a vector tile specification initiated by Mapbox
which was later widely adopted by the geospatial community.

To recap, Mapbox Vector Styles have 3 components:

1.  Sources

2.  Layers

> 3.  Expressions

Author: Actually, that is very pragmatic. I went a little too theoretical. Your path is very attention grabby. And I LIKE IT.

> 3.  Expressions

Author: Allow me to think a moment and incorporate this.

> 3.  Expressions

Author: I added your examples in coming revision. :) Thank you for this.

> Sources contain geospatial features, in GeoJSON format. It's the data to

Author: Noted. The first line did not read easy to me.

> Sources define where the geospatial features to display the map are loaded from.

I wrote the following:

> Layers contains data from a source.  Sources define where the geospatials features displayed on the map are loaded from.

Let me know if this aligns with what you wished for. :)

> Sources contain geospatial features, in GeoJSON format. It's the data to

Reviewer: The "GeoJSON format" bit is still wrong. GeoJSON is one format, MVT is another, and they have little resemblance to each other (beyond the fact they represent geo data).

be visualized on the map. Layers contains data from a source. This is

> where we expressions kick in. Expressions define how the data from a

Author: Thank you for the dep read. I fixed this one. :)

source will be painted in a layer following a style. For example, a

> heatmap, require the ability to paint features in different zoom levels

Author: 🙇 Thank you!

with different colors. Expressions facilitate that. The rendering
depends on the style of the layer along with pitch, bearing, and zoom of

> the map. This was called *Data Driven Styling (DDS)*. Another option

Author: Yeah. I was dubious about it. I documented it from a perspective of history. DDS was a precursor to expressions. It is there to maintain backward compatibility. It's limitations necessitated the birth of expressions. Expressions are the way to go now. I also do not dive deep into expressions for the same reason.

But there's value in your words. I could not convince myself to pick a definite lane so I kept this section unchanged. Curious to hear what you have to say. 😃

that was used was to completely change the style in run time to achieve
the same outcome[^17].

The desire of being able to render a layer in different zoom levels
differently based on data drove the birth of *expressions*. To

> summarize, expressions do the following:

Reviewer 2: I would phrase this more as "common uses of expressions are:" because, any property in the mapbox style that takes an expression, you can do something custom/interesting there, beyond the specific use cases mentioned here.

1.  Expressions filter features from a source layer. This allows to
    apply conditional styling on the full or parts of the feature.

2.  Expressions apply rendering transformations to filtered features.
    MapLibre offers expressions that can interpolate, and paint. An
    expression can be applied to a feature constantly, zoom dependent,
    property dependent, or in zoom and property dependent manner.

> Expressions use a JSON-like syntax to define. For brevity, let's look at

Reviewer 2: > Expressions use a JSON-like syntax to define

Consider:

> Expressions are defined using a JSON-like syntax.

an example expression below:

```
'^': [
NumberType,
NumberType, NumberType],
(ctx, [b, e]) => Math.pow(b.evaluate(ctx), e.evaluate(ctx))
]
```

This defines an expression named `^` that returns a number
expression, and takes two number expressions as input. The
implementation follows right after. Another part to notice here is the
implementation evaluates both inputs because they are expressions too.
Expressions can be nested.

**Although it looks like JavaScript, for MapLibre Native GL**, **the
parser for any expression is written in MapLibre GL Native Core**. Each
platform such as iOS, Android has their own Expression class which
provides builders to build an expression and add it to a layer. When an
expression is added to a layer, the rendering part of the code picks it
up in the MapLibre Native GL Core.

Also, inside MapLibre GL Core, this definition mechanism allows
extending expressions library with custom expressions if desired.

## Expression Types

In the example expression, we saw how one expression is defined. The
example also shows that expressions have types. Expression language can
accept input and output types of null, number, string, boolean, color,

> object, value, array, error, collator, and formatted.

Reviewer 2: What is the `object` type?

Author: The canonical definition of Expressions is rooted in JSON. Like JSON, `object` type  is the mapping key type that maps a set of *keys* to *values*.

I added those lines to the docs too. :)

Expressions are of different *kinds* such as assertion, coalesce,
interpolate, distance etc. Each *kind* of expression performs a single

> responsibility.

Reviewer 2: I know `kind` is the word used in the source code, but a more familiar way to explain this might be to say that you have all these built in functions/operators, such as `coalesce`, `interpolate`, etc.

*Assertion expressions* assert the returning type from one expression is
asserted before putting into another. For example, a filter expression
of `["get", "feature_property"]`, returns a generic *value* type. To
use it on another expression that accepts a string type, an assertion

> such as `["string", ["get", "feature_property"]]` is necessary.

Reviewer 2: > an assertion such as `["string", ["get", "feature_property"]]` is necessary

That should be "a coercion" is necessary, right?

Author: Nice! Yes! 

Thank you again @OmarShehata

Author: I also added the following paragraph for future readers:

> You might think this is a *coercion* instead of an *assertion*. If you are 
seeking for coercions, read the upcoming paragraph. Expression names 
that looks like `to-something` are coercions by convention.

Assertion throws an evaluation-time error if the types don't match
during evaluation.

*Coercion expressions* convert a return type to another type. It also
allows to define a fallback if the conversion fails. A good example of
this is *to-number* expression. For example, `["to-number", ["get",
"feature_property"], 0]` means that we are trying to cover the
feature-property to a number. If it fails, we will use 0 as a fallback.

*Camera expressions* are expressions that allow style property
manipulation based on zoom, pitch, and distance from center.

> Expressions are used *paint* property of a Mapbox Vector Style starting

Reviewer 2: Expressions can be used in layout properties too? And in lots of other places (like `filter` etc)

Author: Ah, I think I went a little too pedantic there. `layer` and `filter` are selctors where `paint` is a property.

with a *layer* selector. Expressions are evaluated by following an
expression chain constructed from the root expression following the
input expressions recursively.

## Implementation

> Implementation wise, expressions are divided into builders and parsers.

Reviewer 2: It would be really useful here to include links to the classes in iOS/Android/core/JS. I know the files may move around, but it'd still be incredibly helpful for someone starting out who wants to extend expressions to know what the class names are/where they may be found.

Author: Oh I wanted to add the classes here honestly. But my knowledge is very limited because I am new to this field. MapLibre Native asks for Graphics, C++, iOS, Android, and Native Interop knowledge all to be have full convergeance of knowledge.

That is why I refrained from adding class names and code pointers. The more I learn, I will update this document with code pointers. I sadly can not act on this feedback now. :)
